The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Refutation of the Charges Made against
the Confederate States of America of Having Authorized the Use of Explosive and Poisoned Musket and Rifle Balls during the Late Civil War of 1861-65, by Horace Edwin Hayden

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Refutation of the Charges Made against the Confederate States of America of Having Authorized the Use of Explosive and Poisoned Musket and Rifle Balls during the Late Civil War of 1861-65

Author: Horace Edwin Hayden

Release Date: July 7, 2008 [EBook #25994]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A REFUTATION OF THE CHARGES ***




Produced by Stephen Blundell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                                    A

                        REFUTATION OF THE CHARGES

                              MADE AGAINST

                    THE CONFEDERATE STATES OF AMERICA

                     OF HAVING AUTHORIZED THE USE OF

              EXPLOSIVE AND POISONED MUSKET AND RIFLE BALLS
                  DURING THE LATE CIVIL WAR OF 1861-65.


                                   BY

                        REV. HORACE EDWIN HAYDEN,

 Member of the Southern Historical Society and the Historical Society of
    Pennsylvania; Corresponding Member of the New England Historical
      and Genealogical Society, the Historical Society of Virginia,
                              &c., &c., &c.


                             _Richmond, Va.:
                   Geo. W. Gary, Printer and Binder._
                                  1879.




EXPLOSIVE AND POISONED MUSKET AND RIFLE BALLS.


The following remarkable statement occurs as a note to the account of
the battle of Gettysburg, on page 78, volume III, of "The Pictorial
History of the Civil War in the United States of America, by Benson J.
Lossing, LL. D.":

    Many, mostly young men, were maimed in every conceivable way, by
    every kind of weapon and missile, the most fiendish of which was an
    explosive and a poisoned bullet, represented in the engraving a
    little more than half the size of the originals, procured from
    the battlefield there by the writer. _These were sent by the
    Confederates. Whether any were ever used by the Nationals, the
    writer is not informed._ One was made to explode in the body of the
    man, and the other to leave a deadly poison in him, whether the
    bullet lodged in or passed through him.

    Figure A represents the explosive bullet. The perpendicular stem,
    with a piece of thin copper hollowed, and a head over it of bullet
    metal, fitted a cavity in the bullet proper below it, as seen in the
    engraving. In the bottom of the cavity was fulminating powder. When
    the bullet struck, the momentum would cause the copper in the outer
    disc to flatten, and allow the point of the stem to strike and
    explode the fulminating powder, when the bullet would be rent into
    fragments which would lacerate the victim.

    In figure B the bullet proper was hollowed, into which was inserted
    another, also hollow, containing poison. The latter being loose,
    would slip out and remain in the victim's body or limbs with its
    freight of poison if the bullet proper should pass through. Among
    the Confederate wounded at the College were boys of tender age and
    men who had been forced into the ranks against their will.

The italics I am responsible for. It is difficult for those who live at
the South to realize how extensively such insinuating slanders as the
above against the Confederates are credited at the North, even by
reading people.

I purpose in this paper to examine the statement of the author of this
Pictorial History, and to show, by indisputable proof, its recklessness
and its falsity. In the above quotation, he states that he had picked
up, on the battlefield of Gettysburg, an _explosive_ and a _poisoned_
ball. "_These_," he adds, "_were sent by the Confederates. Whether any
were ever used by the Nationals, the writer is not informed._" I do not
desire to be severe beyond justice; but it does seem that as no one
ventured to inform him to the contrary, this author accepted the silence
of the world and deliberately put into print this slander against the
Confederates without having made any apparent effort to learn, as he
could have done with ease, whether his statement had any basis of truth.

It is with entire confidence in the facts presented in this paper that I
_deny_ this author's statement, above, to be a statement of fact. I do
more than this--

I. _I most emphatically deny that the Confederate States ever authorized
the use of explosive or poisoned musket or rifle balls._

II. I most emphatically assert that the United States _did purchase,
authorize, issue and use explosive musket or rifle balls_ during the
late civil war, and that they were thus officially authorized and used
at the battle of Gettysburg.

It happened in 1864, the day after the negro troops made their desperate
and drunken charge on the Confederate lines to the left of Chaffin's
farm and were so signally repulsed, that the writer, who was located in
the trenches a mile still further to the left, picked up, in the field
outside the trenches assailed by the negroes, some of the cartridges
these poor black victims had dropped, containing the very "_explosive_"
ball described in the above quotation and charged to the Confederates. I
have preserved one of these balls ever since. It lies before me as I
write. It is similar to figure A, and with a _zinc_ and not a _copper_
disc. _It never contained any fulminating powder._ The construction of
the ball led me to make investigations to ascertain its purpose. At
first, I thought it might be made to leave in the body of the person
struck by it three pieces of metal, instead of one, to irritate, and
possibly destroy life. But this theory appeared to me so "fiendish" that
I was unwilling to accept it, and I became convinced, after more careful
examination, that the purpose of the ball was to increase the momentum,
by forcing in the cap and expanding the disc so as to fill up the
grooves of the rifle. The correctness of this view will be proven in
this paper.

In the first place, although the charge made by the author of the
Pictorial History of the Civil War against the Confederates of having
used explosive and poisoned balls, has been made before, and often
repeated since, it has never been supported by one grain of proof. How
did this author ascertain that the balls he picked up on the battlefield
of Gettysburg were sent by the Confederates? How did he learn that one
was an _explosive_ and the other a _poisoned_ projectile? Did he test
the explosive power of the one and the poisonous character of the other?
He gives no evidence of having done so, and advances no proof of his
assertions.

It is a very remarkable fact that no case was ever reported in Northern
hospitals, or by Northern surgeons, of Union soldiers having been
wounded by such barbarous missiles as these from the Confederate side.

I have very carefully examined those valuable quarto volumes issued by
the United States Medical Department and entitled "The Medical and
Surgical History of the Rebellion," and as yet have failed to find any
case of wound or death reported as having occurred by an explosive or
poisoned musket ball, excepting that on page 91 of volume II of said
work there is a table of four thousand and two (4,002) cases of gunshot
wounds of the scalp, _two_ (2) of which occurred by _explosive musket
balls_. To which army these two belonged does not appear.

A letter addressed to the Surgeon-General of the United States by the
writer on this subject, has elicited the reply that the Medical
Department is without any information as to wounds by such missiles. I
do not find such projectiles noticed as preserved in the museum of the
Surgeon-General's Department, where rifle projectiles taken from wounds
are usually deposited.

In the _second_ place, the manufacture, purchase, issue or use of such
projectiles for firearms by the Confederate States, is positively denied
by the Confederate authorities, as the following correspondence will
show:

                                       BEAUVOIR, MISS., 28th June, 1879.

    My Dear Sir-- ... In reply to your inquiries as to the use of
    explosive or poisoned balls by the troops of the Confederate States,
    I state as positively as one may in such a case that the charge has
    no foundation in truth. Our Government certainly did not manufacture
    or import such balls, and if any were captured from the enemy, they
    could probably only have been used in the captured arms for which
    they were suited. I heard occasionally that the enemy did use
    explosive balls, and others prepared so as to leave a copper ring in
    the wound, but it was always spoken of as an atrocity beneath
    knighthood and abhorrent to civilization. The slander is only one of
    many instances in which our enemy have committed or attempted crimes
    of which our people and their Government were incapable, and then
    magnified the guilt by accusing us of the offences they had
    committed....

               Believe me, ever faithfully yours,
                                                        JEFFERSON DAVIS.

General Josiah Gorgas, the Chief of Ordnance of the Confederate
States--now of the University of Alabama--writes, under date of July
11th, 1879, that to his "knowledge the Confederate States never
authorized or used explosive or poisoned rifle balls during the late
war." In this statement also General I. M. St. John and General John
Ellicott, both of the Ordnance Bureau, Confederate States army, entirely
concur.

The Adjutant-General of the United States also writes me, under date of
August 22d, 1879, as to the Confederate archives now in the possession
of the National Government, as follows: "In reply to yours of the 18th
August, I have the honor to inform you that the Confederate States
records in the possession of this Department furnish no evidence that
poisoned or explosive musket balls were used by the army of the
Confederate States."

Rev. J. William Jones, D. D., Secretary of the Southern Historical
Society, has written me to the same effect as to the archives in the
possession of the Society.

In the _third_ place, a brief examination of the United States Patent
Office Reports for 1862-3, and the Ordnance Reports for 1863-4, will
show that the "_explosive and the poisoned balls_" which the author of
the "Pictorial History of the Civil War" so gratuitously charges upon
the Confederates, were patented by the United States Patent Office at
Washington, and were purchased, issued and used by the United States
Government, and, what is still more remarkable, that _neither of the
aforesaid projectiles were in any sense explosive or poisoned_.

In the Patent Office Report for 1862-3 will be found the following, with
the corresponding illustration in the second volume:

    No. 37,145--Elijah D. Williams, of Philadelphia,
    Pennsylvania--_Improvement in Elongated Bullets_--Patent dated
    December 9, 1862.

    This invention consists in the combination with an elongated
    expanding bullet of a leaded pin and a concave expanding disc, the
    disc having its concave side against the base of the bullet, and the
    pin entering the cavity thereof and operating to produce the
    flattening of the disc, by which it is caused _to expand against the
    walls of and enter the groves of the gun_.

    Claim--First, the combination with elongated expanding bullets of a
    pin, C, and expanding disc, B, applied substantially as herein
    specified. Second, fitting the pin to the cavity of the bullet in
    the manner substantially as herein specified, whereby the expansion
    of the bullet is caused to commence in the front part of its
    expanding portion and to be gradually continued toward the rear as
    herein set forth.

So much for the _explosive_ ball "_sent by the Confederates_."

In the same volume of the Patent Office Reports will be found also the
following:

    No. 36,197--Ira W. Shaler, of Brooklyn, New York, and Reuben Shaler,
    of Madison, Connecticut, assigned to Ira W. Shaler
    aforesaid--_Improvement in Compound Bullet for Small Arms_--Patent
    dated August 12, 1862.

    This projectile is composed of two or more parts which fit the bore
    of the barrel and so constructed that the forward end of each of the
    parts in the rear of the front one enters a cavity in the rear of
    the one before it, and is formed in relation to the same in such a
    manner as to separate from it after leaving the barrel of the gun
    and make a slight deviation in its line of flight from that of its
    predecessor.

    Claim--The projectile hereinbefore described, made up of two or more
    parts, each of equal diameter, constructed as set forth so as to
    separate from each other.

No illustration of this projectile appears in the illustrated volume of
patents; but an official drawing of it from the Patent Office lies
before me. The ball is slightly different from figure B (_supra_), in
that it is here perfect, and figure B gives but two parts of the
missile.

So much for the _poisoned_ ball "_sent by the Confederates_."

Any person ought to know perfectly well that it was not necessary to
invent or construct a rifle ball especially adapted to carry poison,
when the common minnie ball itself, dipped into liquid poison and
coated, as ball cartridges are usually finished, with wax or tallow,
would have effected the same purpose.

To what extent the bullets of Williams and Shaler were used during the
late war by the United States troops, the following official
communication from the War Department at Washington, under date of
September 16, 1879, will show:

    Sir--In reply to your letter of the 9th instant to the Secretary of
    War, I have to inform you that during the late war a great many of
    the bullets patented by Elijah D. Williams and about 200,000 of
    those patented by Ira W. Shaler were used by the United States.

               Respectfully, your obedient servant,
                               S. C. LYFORD, _Acting Chief of Ordnance_.

In the _fourth_ place, in repelling and refuting the charge against the
Confederates of having used explosive musket or rifle projectiles, I
charge the United States Government with not only patenting, but
purchasing and using, especially at the battle of Gettysburg, an
_explosive musket shell_; nor do I trust to my imagination, but I
present the facts, which are as follows:

In April, 1862, the Commissioner of Public Buildings at Washington
brought to the attention of the Assistant Secretary of War--then Mr.
John Tucker--the explosive musket shell invented by Samuel Gardiner, jr.
The Assistant Secretary at once referred the matter to General James W.
Ripley, who was then the Chief of the Ordnance Bureau at Washington.
What action was taken will appear when it is stated that in May, 1862,
the Chief of Ordnance at the West Point Military Academy made a report
to the Government of a trial of the Gardiner musket shell. In May, 1862,
Mr. Gardiner offered to sell some of his explosive musket shells to the
Government at a stipulated price. His application was referred to
General Ripley with the following endorsement:

    Will General Ripley consider whether this explosive shell will be a
    valuable missile in battle?

                                                             A. LINCOLN.

General Ripley replied that "it had no value as a service projectile."

In June, 1862, Brigadier-General Rufus King, at Fredericksburg, made a
requisition for some of the Gardiner musket shells. On referring this
application to the Chief of Ordnance, General Ripley, that old army
officer, whose sense of right must have been shocked at this instance of
barbarism, a second time recorded his disapproval, replying that "it was
not advisable to furnish any such missiles to the troops at present in
service."

In September, 1862, the Chief of Ordnance of the Eleventh corps, United
States army, recommended the shell to the Assistant Secretary of War,
who ordered 10,000 rounds to be purchased--made into cartridges. Of this
number, 200 were issued to Mr. Gardiner for trial by the Eleventh corps.
In October, 1862, the Chief of Ordnance of the Eleventh corps, then in
reserve near Fairfax Courthouse, sent in a requisition, endorsed by the
General commanding the corps, for 20,000 Gardiner musket shells and
cartridges. The Assistant Secretary of War referred the matter to the
Chief of Ordnance, General Ripley, who for the _third_ time recorded his
disapproval of such issue. Nevertheless, the Assistant Secretary of War
ordered the issue to be made to the Eleventh corps of the remaining
9,800 shells and cartridges, which order was obeyed.

In November, 1862, Mr. Gardiner offered to sell to the United States his
explosive musket shell and cartridge at $35 per thousand, calibre 58.
The Assistant Secretary of War at once ordered 100,000, of which 75,000
were calibre 58 for infantry, and 25,000 calibre 54 for cavalry service.

In June, 1863, the Second New Hampshire volunteers made a requisition
for 35,000 of these shells, and by order of the Assistant Secretary of
War, they received 24,000. Of this number, 10,060 were abandoned in
Virginia and 13,940 distributed to the regiment. The report of this
regiment, made subsequently, shows that in the third quarter of
1863--that is, from July 1st to October 1st--about 4,000 of these shells
were used in trials and target firing, and about 10,000 were used in
action. The Second New Hampshire regiment was in the battle of
Gettysburg, and 49 of its members lie buried in the cemetery there.

The above statement shows that the Assistant Secretary of War, against
what might be regarded as the protest of the Chief of Ordnance,
purchased 110,000 of the Gardiner explosive musket shells, and issued to
the troops in actual service 35,000, leaving 75,000 on hand at the close
of the war.

In 1866 the Russian Government issued a circular calling a convention of
the Nations for the purpose of declaring against the use of explosive
projectiles in war. To this circular the then Chief of Ordnance of the
United States, General A. B. Dyer, made the following reply, which I
have but little doubt expresses the sentiment which actuated General
Ripley in his disapproval of the purchase and issue of the Gardiner
musket shell:

                                        ORDNANCE OFFICE, WAR DEPARTMENT,
                                          WASHINGTON, August 19, 1868.

    HON. J. M. SCHOFIELD, _Secretary of War_:

    Sir--I have read the communication from the Russian Minister in
    relation to the abolishment of the use of explosive projectiles in
    military warfare, with the attention and care it well deserves.

    I concur heartily in the sentiments therein expressed, and I trust
    that our Government will respond unhesitatingly to the proposition
    in behalf of humanity and civilization. The use in warfare of
    explosive balls, so sensitive as to ignite and burst on striking a
    substance as soft and yielding as animal flesh (of men or horses), I
    consider barbarous and no more to be tolerated by civilized nations
    than the universally reprobated practice of using poisoned missiles,
    or of poisoning food or drink to be left in the way of an enemy.
    Such a practice is inexcusable among any people above the grade of
    ignorant savages. Neither do I regard the use in war of such
    explosive balls as of any public advantage, but rather the reverse;
    for it will have the effect of killing outright, rather than
    wounding, and it is known that the care of wounded men much more
    embarrasses the future operations of the enemy than the loss of the
    same number killed, who require no further attention which may delay
    or impede them.

    There is a class of explosive projectiles now used, the
    discontinuance of which is not demanded by humanity, and the use of
    which may be considered legitimate. These are the projectiles which
    can only be exploded by contact with hard, resisting substances, and
    which are generally used for destroying ships, caissons, or light
    fortifications, and not directly against men or animals in the
    opposing ranks. These latter ought not and probably cannot be
    included in an agreement or treaty to prohibit their use in warfare;
    but I strongly advocate an agreement or treaty binding all civilized
    nations to discontinue and forever abandon the use in war of that
    class of missiles or projectiles which may be used in small arms and
    be so sensitive as to explode on contact with animal flesh.

    The papers in the case, received through the State and War
    Departments, are herewith returned.

    In this connection, I also notice a letter from the Hon. C. M. Clay,
    our Minister to Russia, which has been referred to this office and
    herewith returned, and on which I have to report. If the civilized
    nations persist in refusing to discontinue and abandon the use of
    sensitive explosive balls, then it would be well for this Government
    to enter into the agreement suggested by Mr. Clay, whereby we may be
    enabled to secure their use in case of necessity, by an agreement
    with him, or his named authorized agent, for the payment of a
    stipulated royalty on each that may be procured from him, or may be
    used in the Government service.

               Respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                                    A. B. DYER,
                              _Brevet Major-General, Chief of Ordnance_.

I have recorded enough to show the recklessness and falsity of the
charge against the Confederates of using such missiles in small arms
during the late war, and the public is hereby specifically "_informed
whether the Nationals ever used them_."

In the Patent Office Report for 1863-4 will be found the following
account of the Gardiner musket shell:

    No. 40,468--Samuel Gardiner, jr., of New York, N. Y.--_Improvement
    in Hollow Projectiles_--Patent dated November 3, 1863.

    The shell to form the central chamber is attached to a mandrel, and
    the metal forced into a mould around it.

    Claim--Constructing shells for firearms by forcing the metal into a
    mould around an internal shell supported on a mandrel.

I have a box of these shells in my possession. They are open for
examination by any persons who may desire to see them.

This summer the distinguished officer who commanded the 143d regiment of
Pennsylvania volunteers, United States army, at the battle of
Gettysburg, informed me that during the last day of the battle, he and
his men frequently heard, above their heads, amid the whistling of the
minnie balls from the Confederate side, sharp, explosive sounds like the
snapping of musket caps. He mentioned the matter to an ordnance officer
at the time. The officer replied that what he heard was explosive rifle
balls, which the Confederates had captured from the Union troops, who
had lately received them from the Ordnance Department.

From the fact that the Gardiner shell is not fitted with a percussion
cap at the point of the projectile, and is not easily exploded by hand,
and from the additional fact that only about ten thousand are reported
as having been used in action, I am willing to believe that the primary
purpose of the Government of the United States in using them was the
exploding of caissons. There is, moreover, no evidence that any of these
shells were issued from the Ordnance Bureau after the year 1863. The
Gardiner shells are so constructed as to have no different appearance in
the cartridge from the common minnie ball--only the title on the box,
and an examination of the ball when separate from the cartridge, giving
any indication of its explosive character.

I know not _certainly_ if any other such projectiles were used by the
United States troops, nor have I any especial desire to prosecute the
investigation further than to prove the position taken in this paper.

It would be disingenuous in me if I failed to notice the fact that a
charge somewhat similar to that which begins this article was made by a
correspondent in the _Scientific American_ for September 6th, 1862,
volume VII, page 151, as follows:

    Recently it was my privilege to examine, in the hands of a man just
    from Fortress Monroe, an explosive bullet, such as was used by the
    Rebels in the six days' battle. It is conical in shape, about one
    inch long, made of lead, and consists of two parts--viz: a solid
    head piece and a cylindrical chamber, which are united together by a
    screw. From the point of the bullet projects a little rod, which
    passes down through a small hole in the head piece into the chamber
    below, where it was connected with a percussion cap. The chamber
    contains about a tablespoonful of powder. You can readily perceive
    that if the bullet should encounter a bone or other hard substance
    when entering a man's body, it will explode and thereby produce a
    fatal wound.

                                                                F. J. C.
    PHILADELPHIA, August 23, 1862.

In the Patent Office Report (United States) for 1863-4 will be found a
shell exactly corresponding to this one:

    No. 39,593--Joseph Nottingham Smith, New York, N. Y.--_Improvement
    in Elongated Projectile for Firearms_--Patent dated August 18, 1863.

    It consists of an elongated cylinder having a charge chamber in its
    rear portion, which contains powder for propulsion. The point is a
    pointed axical bolt, whose rear is furnished with a percussion cap,
    to be exploded by the forward motion of a striker on the concussion
    of the projectile.

Not having seen this ball, I cannot _certainly_ identify it with the
ball mentioned by F. J. C., but it is evidently the same.

The inference is very natural that if these several projectiles,
patented by the United States Patent Office, as the invention of
Northern men, during the war, and used by the United States armies, were
ever used by the Confederates, it was only as captured ammunition. It
was hardly possible, at any reasonable cost, to run them through the
blockade to the South.

In conclusion, it may be well to draw attention to Mr. Lossing's
intimation in the note quoted at the beginning of this paper, that the
men of the South were forced into the Confederate ranks against their
will, while those of the North were volunteers. Does Mr. Lossing
purposely forget the United States drafts made to fill up the depleted
regiments in the field, and especially the draft of May, 1863, two
months before the battle of Gettysburg, and the riots that occurred in
New York city as the result of that draft? Does he purposely forget that
the United States established recruiting offices in Europe to procure
men for her armies?

It may be questioned whether as a historian Mr. Lossing is deserving
even the notice of a novice in history; for, while he is known to be a
voluminous writer of American history, he is also known to be a writer
of many and great inaccuracies. A writer who has allowed himself to be
so easily imposed upon as in his ready acceptance as true history of the
Morgan Jones Welsh Indian fraud (American Historical Record, I, 250);
who makes such glaring historical mistakes as his statement that General
Braddock was defeated and killed at the "battle of the Great Meadows"
(History of the Revolutionary War), and that Captain John Smith, the
Virginia explorer, had explored the Susquehanna river as far north as
the Wyoming Valley (Harper's Magazine, November, 1860), and who draws so
largely on his imagination, and is so much controlled by his prejudices
in his "History of the Civil War," cannot be considered an entirely
trustworthy historian. But because Mr. Lossing's histories have flooded
the North, and are largely accepted as authentic narrations of events,
it is due to the Confederates and the cause for which they so long and
nobly battled, against such fearful odds, that the truth be made known
and Mr. Lossing's misstatements exposed.

It is earnestly to be hoped that the facts presented in this paper will
forever set at rest the malicious slander so often repeated against the
Confederates, by many who are so willing to believe anything against
them, of having authorized the use in military warfare of such atrocious
and barbarous missiles as "_explosive and poisoned_" musket or rifle
balls.

                                                                H. E. H.

BROWNSVILLE, PA., September 1, 1879.




Transcriber's Note:

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note, however
    'axical' (p. 12), being within a quotation, remains as printed.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Refutation of the Charges Made
against the Confederate States of America of Having Authorized the Use of Explosive and Poisoned Musket and Rifle Balls during the Late Civil War of 1861-65, by Horace Edwin Hayden

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A REFUTATION OF THE CHARGES ***

***** This file should be named 25994.txt or 25994.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/9/9/25994/

Produced by Stephen Blundell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
